Add docs on how to fix flaky tests (#6438)
citusdata/citus: src/test/regress/flaky_tests.md

# How to fix flaky tests

> There's three different causes of flaky tests.

Reviewer: Grammar: There are ...

1. Tests that don't make sure output is consistent, i.e. a bug in our tests
2. Bugs in our testing infrastructure
3. Bugs in Citus itself

All of these impact the happiness of our developers, because we have to rerun

> tests to make them pass. But apart for developer happiness 3 also impacts our

Reviewer: apart for -> apart from

output consistent

**Example**
```diff
  8970008 | colocated_dist_table                   | -2147483648   | 2147483647    | localhost |    57637
  8970009 | colocated_partitioned_table            | -2147483648   | 2147483647    | localhost |    57637
  8970010 | colocated_partitioned_table_2020_01_01 | -2147483648   | 2147483647    | localhost |    57637
- 8970011 | reference_table                        |               |               | localhost |    57637
  8970011 | reference_table                        |               |               | localhost |    57638
+ 8970011 | reference_table                        |               |               | localhost |    57637
 (13 rows)
```

**Example fix**:

```diff
-ORDER BY logicalrelid, shardminvalue::BIGINT;
+ORDER BY logicalrelid, shardminvalue::BIGINT, nodeport;
```

### Expected logs but different order

**Issue**: The logs in the regress output are displayed in a different order
than what the output file shows

**Fix**: It's simple: don't log these things during the test. There's two common
ways of achieving this:
1. If you don't care about the logs for this query at all, then you can change
   the log `VERBOSITY`

> 2. If this is are logs created by `citus.log_remote_commands` and you care about

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. If these are logs created by `citus.log_remote_commands` and you care about
```

>    some of the remote commands being as expected, but not the ones in question.
>    Then you can use `citus.grep_remote_commands` to only display the commands

Reviewer 2: NIT: up to you
```suggestion
   some of the remote commands being as expected, 
   then you can use `citus.grep_remote_commands` to only display the commands
```

   that you care about.

> **Example 1**:

Reviewer 2: Very NIT: Can you make the Example/Fix pair consistent across the file.
e.g. example 1/fix 1; example of issue 1/example of fix 1

 -- should propagate to all workers because no table is specified
 ANALYZE;
 NOTICE:  issuing BEGIN TRANSACTION ISOLATION LEVEL READ COMMITTED;SELECT assign_distributed_transaction_id(0, 3461, '2022-08-19 01:56:06.35816-07');
 DETAIL:  on server postgres@localhost:57637 connectionId: 1
 NOTICE:  issuing BEGIN TRANSACTION ISOLATION LEVEL READ COMMITTED;SELECT assign_distributed_transaction_id(0, 3461, '2022-08-19 01:56:06.35816-07');
 DETAIL:  on server postgres@localhost:57638 connectionId: 2
 NOTICE:  issuing SET citus.enable_ddl_propagation TO 'off'
 DETAIL:  on server postgres@localhost:57637 connectionId: 1
-NOTICE:  issuing SET citus.enable_ddl_propagation TO 'off'
-DETAIL:  on server postgres@localhost:xxxxx connectionId: xxxxxxx
 NOTICE:  issuing ANALYZE
 DETAIL:  on server postgres@localhost:57637 connectionId: 1
+NOTICE:  issuing SET citus.enable_ddl_propagation TO 'off'
+DETAIL:  on server postgres@localhost:57638 connectionId: 2
 NOTICE:  issuing ANALYZE
 DETAIL:  on server postgres@localhost:57638 connectionId: 2
```

**Example of fix 2**
```diff
 SET citus.log_remote_commands TO ON;
+SET citus.grep_remote_commands = '%ANALYZE%';
```

> ### Isolation test completes in different order

Reviewer 2: Some isolation tests steps will also flakily wait sometimes due to step duration, and there is a special syntax to always make the test wait regardless of how long it takes. I remember @hanefi used in a flaky test fix before. You or Hanefi might want to add that here as well.

> **Issue**: The two sessions in the isolation test get unblocked at the same

Reviewer 3: pretty minor:

I find this wording a little confusing for `Issue` description; `get unblocked at the same time` 

I think the issue is more like: `there is no strict ordering between steps as there is not explicit locking between them`.   

And then the outcome of the issue is what you write. (so, happy to have (variations of) both sentences)

+    s
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
- 21 MB
+ 22500000
```

## Simple things to try

If it's none of the above, than probably the reason why the test is flaky is not
immediately obvious. There's a few simple things that sometimes help for various reasons

### Don't run test in parallel with others

Check in the schedule if the test is run in parallel with others. If it is,
remove it from there and check if its still flaky.

**Example**
```diff
 test: multi_partitioning_utils replicated_partitioned_table
-test: multi_partitioning partitioning_issue_3970
+test: multi_partitioning
+test: partitioning_issue_3970
 test: drop_partitioned_table
```

### Multiple connections cause issues

Citus its adaptive executor sometimes opens extra connections to do stuff in
parallel. This happens especially in CI, because CI machines are sometimes slow.
To disable parallelism and get consistent you can use `citus.max_adaptive_executor_pool_size`.

**Example**
```
+SET citus.max_adaptive_executor_pool_size TO 1;
 ALTER TABLE dist_partitioned_table ADD CONSTRAINT constraint1 UNIQUE (dist_col, partition_col);

> +RESET citus.max_adaptive_executor_pool_size TO 1;

Reviewer 3: I guess the right syntax would be `RESET citus.max_adaptive_executor_pool_size`

> ```

Reviewer 2: Can you also do an example/fix pair here.

IMPORTANT: If this helps, this could very well indicate a bug. Check with
senior/principal engineers if it's expected that it helps in this case.

## What to do if this all doesn't work?

If none of the advice above worked, the first thing to try is read the failing
test in detail and try to understand how it works. Often, with a bit of thinking
you can figure out why it's failing in the way that it's failing. If you cannot
figure it out yourself, it's good to ask senior/principal engineers, maybe they
can think of the reason. Or maybe they're certain that it's an actual bug.

> ## What to do if output can never be consistent?

Reviewer 3: would be super useful to add one example to this section as well. I have seen many people struggling to add a good one (including myself;) ))

# How to fix flaky tests

Flaky tests happen when for some reason our tests return non-deterministic
results.

There are three different causes of flaky tests:
1. Tests that don't make sure output is consistent, i.e. a bug in our tests
2. Bugs in our testing infrastructure
3. Bugs in Citus itself

All of these impact the happiness and productivity of our developers, because we
have to rerun tests to make them pass. But apart from developer happiness and
productivity, 3 also impacts our users, and by ignoring flaky tests we can miss

> problems that our users could run into. Thus reducing the effectiveness of our

Reviewer: ```suggestion
problems that our users could run into. This reduces the effectiveness of our
```

tests.

## Easy fixes

The following types of issues all fall within the category 1: bugs in our tests.

### Expected records but different order

**Issue**: A query returns the right result, but they are in a different order
than expected by the output.

> **Fix**: Add an extra column to the ORDER BY clause to the query to make the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Fix**: Add an extra column to the ORDER BY clause of the query to make the
```

```

**Example of issue 2**
```diff
SET citus.log_remote_commands TO ON;
 -- should propagate to all workers because no table is specified
 ANALYZE;
 NOTICE:  issuing BEGIN TRANSACTION ISOLATION LEVEL READ COMMITTED;SELECT assign_distributed_transaction_id(0, 3461, '2022-08-19 01:56:06.35816-07');
 DETAIL:  on server postgres@localhost:57637 connectionId: 1
 NOTICE:  issuing BEGIN TRANSACTION ISOLATION LEVEL READ COMMITTED;SELECT assign_distributed_transaction_id(0, 3461, '2022-08-19 01:56:06.35816-07');
 DETAIL:  on server postgres@localhost:57638 connectionId: 2
 NOTICE:  issuing SET citus.enable_ddl_propagation TO 'off'
 DETAIL:  on server postgres@localhost:57637 connectionId: 1
-NOTICE:  issuing SET citus.enable_ddl_propagation TO 'off'
-DETAIL:  on server postgres@localhost:xxxxx connectionId: xxxxxxx
 NOTICE:  issuing ANALYZE
 DETAIL:  on server postgres@localhost:57637 connectionId: 1
+NOTICE:  issuing SET citus.enable_ddl_propagation TO 'off'
+DETAIL:  on server postgres@localhost:57638 connectionId: 2
 NOTICE:  issuing ANALYZE
 DETAIL:  on server postgres@localhost:57638 connectionId: 2
```

**Example fix of issue 2**
```diff
 SET citus.log_remote_commands TO ON;

> +SET citus.grep_remote_commands = '%ANALYZE%';

Reviewer: Cool, I didn't know we have this GUC.

Author: Nice to hear, people not knowing about some of these kind of tricks are exactly why I'm writing this document.

with [race conditions in isolation tests][pg-isolation-docs]. A common example
was already listed above, but the Postgres docs list some other types too and
explain how to make their output consistent.

[pg-isolation-docs]: https://github.com/postgres/postgres/blob/c68a1839902daeb42cf1ebc89edfdd91c00e5091/src/test/isolation/README#L152

## Ruling out common sources of randomness as the cause

If it's none of the above, then probably the reason why the test is flaky is not
immediately obvious. There are a few things that can introduce randomness into
our test suite. To keep your sanity while investigating, it's good to rule these
out as the cause (or even better determine that they are the cause).

### Don't run test in parallel with others

Check in the schedule if the test is run in parallel with others. If it is,
remove it from there and check if its still flaky.

**Example**
```diff
 test: multi_partitioning_utils replicated_partitioned_table
-test: multi_partitioning partitioning_issue_3970
+test: multi_partitioning
+test: partitioning_issue_3970
 test: drop_partitioned_table
```

### Use a fixed number of connections

> Citus its adaptive executor sometimes opens extra connections to do stuff in

Author: The contraction would actually be, but personally I don't think that looks/reads very nice so I'll keep it as is:
```suggestion
Citus' adaptive executor sometimes opens extra connections to do stuff in
```

> Citus its adaptive executor sometimes opens extra connections to do stuff in

Reviewer: `Citus's` is not a contraction of `Citus its`. I believe `Citus its` doesn't exist. If anything, `Citus's adaptive executor` can be called the contraction of `The adaptive executor of Citus`. So, the following suggestion is also grammatically correct:
```suggestion
The adaptive executor of Citus sometimes opens extra connections to do stuff in
```

Note: Citus' is also not grammatically correct. We use just the apostrophe, without the "s", when showing possession of plural nouns, not when nouns in general end with s. My point is, `Citus's` is correct, `Citus'` is not correct.
